Happy Holidays! Welcome to the seventh broadcast of the PBC Morning Dawn Study
Group at Padmasami Ling. Today we'll be discussing Chapter 7 from the Venerable
Khenpo Rinpoches book, "The Buddhist Path," which is called "Loving-kindness." So first
we'll do opening prayers like usual, and then we'll begin the discussion. Thanks
so much.
[Singing in Hindi]
The supreme tradition of the glorious Buddha Padmasambhava, which is the essential extraordinary
view and doctrine of the early translation school. You keep alive and spread by the light
of wisdom. Lord of Dharma, great Khenpo, and pray at your lowly seat. In the palace of
the ogum in Dharma Daptu, the essence of all the Buddhas of the three times, the one who
chose clearly the Dharmakaya of my own mind, who prayed to the Honorable Raghuram, "Lorraine's
true teacher, precious one, dwelling on the loaded seat in the crown of my head. Hold
me with your great kindness and bestow the accomplishments of body, speech, and mind."
[Singing in Hindi]
Thanks. So then in the beginning of Chapter 7, which begins page 37, this "Loving-kindness,"
a quick overview. The first Venerable Kimberimache says that once you have the thought to attain
enlightenment, then the next step is to increase that motivation to attain enlightenment as
much as possible, and then to wish for everyone to generate bodhicitta. And for those who
have already generated bodhicitta, for them to continue generating bodhicitta as much
as possible. And then they go on to say that compassion is based on loving-kindness and
that once you have love for others, you don't want to hurt them. And with the measurable
love, you will always treat all beings as your loved ones. And then now, we are more
or less love only a few people, and it's mainly based on attachment. But immeasurable love
is different from this. It's based on recognition and understanding of emptiness, and thus it
becomes an immeasurable love. So then we'll go to this first topic point we'll talk about.
Typically, at the present time, we love only a few people, ourselves, our family, our close
friends. This limited notion of love is an ordinary emotion. The love between two people
is part of the love and compassion we are talking about, but this form of love is based
on attachment and clinging. The immeasurable love of bodhicitta is based on emptiness. Since
infinite love is combined with equanimity, it is not an emotion. It's page 37, third
paragraph. I was thinking about this week, we kind of discussed it a little bit last
session when we were talking about bodhicitta. I mean, just how Rinpoche's are talking about
here, how referring to love, like our ordinary love, like what we might feel for our girlfriend
or boyfriend or whatever, or just another person. And I just thought, I mean, it just
seems like an interesting subject to just think about more, that thing, how everybody
experiences love somehow, in some way, it's like so apparent to us. And then here it is
also when it's, but it's limited, just to look at that difference between limited love
and then this like limitless love. And then just thinking about, too, like this thing
of, you know, the empty nature of things and equanimity and how that kind of transforms
everything. But I don't know, it's not really a question, but just kind of, it seems like
that bridge between this limit, limitation, and not like necessarily, obviously, love
is lovely. We don't want to reject our love for others, but just like this whole practice
of expanding and not grasping so much, just wondering what other people kind of thought
around that general area of actually actualizing that, you know? Or would it?
Yeah, I was just wondering about that last sentence, "since infinite love is combined
with equanimity, it is not an emotion." I wasn't sure why that made it not an emotion,
because you're not feeling it, or like in the same way as you would for a parent, or
something like that. Why is it that combined with equanimity is not an emotion?
I think this is a particular translation issue, too, I think, because oftentimes they say
emotion free from emotion. And I think often there's really a distinction between negative
or afflictive emotions, and then positive or natural emotions. I think there really is
a little translation issue there, that afflictive emotions come from when we're tied and grasping,
eco-clinging, or have a particular something in mind that we're trying to get with a very
limited view. And so then any emotion we would have, whether it's something we're trying
to pull towards us or push away, then that would be afflictive, meaning based on grasping.
And that a positive goodness quality or a natural emotion, they say here that that love
between two people, or that that is like a little window into our bodhicitta, this larger
vast or unlimited bodhicitta, or this goodness nature qualities. But that when we're connected
to that bodhicitta, or that nature, or that emptiness nature, that this arising capacity
is naturally loving, compassionate, and kind, and that that would be considered a positive
emotion, like a positive expression of that. So then to say just free of emotion, sometimes
it seems like, oh, just zombie-like, or oh, I want to be free of emotion. And everyone
says, I don't want that because that doesn't seem so fun. Yeah. There's no distinction.
So you think that it's really, that it's not an afflictive emotion? I think so.
Or an emotion based on just like this cliche of consciousness or whatever, this dualistic
belief in, you know, it's seeing the emptiness nature, I think. And the reason why I could
be vast and impartial and valorous and immeasurable is because it's not just taking, you know,
a narrow, limited perspective that myself is real, everyone else is real, and therefore
within that spectrum, you have preferences for it.
I kind of like the idea of thinking about the emptiness as without boundary, you know,
kind of like without drawing lines around like me and you, or like this, you know, community,
and there's kind of like these borders or boundaries, and like the emptiness is really
just that totally open without any of those boundaries like that, that love that you share
with one person, with a few people that like just really like working to extend that, like
beyond all, you know, because they're just concepts anyway, just conceptual notions of
me and you and us and this country and all those, it's just totally a, you know, it's
just a figment or, you know, it's illusory, those lines that we draw on our minds of the
map of the world, you know, so just really kind of pushing that, it's like expanding
and expanding.
And it seems too there's that also, there's that expansiveness and then there's also that
part of the clarity, like even in a relationship with one person, when there isn't so much
grasping and like totally holding ourselves to be a certain way or a certain thing and
that person to be a certain way and behave a certain way, but to really like that part
of love where we see just really clearly see the beautiful qualities and even more than
that, just know there's no or whatever, have trust or just that when there's not so much
clutching or holding on, there's that openness and the same time there's like that, that
clarity aspect, which of course, I mean, that's a term we always use a lot with the clarity
and emptiness, but even just in that sense of like how even in one to one with one person,
not to mention infinite limitless sentient beings, you know, but just even that the way
beginning with one person kind of where we can really appreciate the beautiful qualities
and see them clearly and but yet not, not be so restricted or thinking that, oh, this
person is only this one way or they, you know, and there's lots of ways it can go, but that
clarity aspect of like clearly seeing what it is we love and just not the way that's
so smooth and kind of just vivid and it does kind of seem to have a feeling of expanding
and more easily breathes, you know, with everything and allows room for growing.
I think that's a really big point there. I mean, both are what you both said that one
is there's no fixed boundary. So we can love one person and two and three and like really
are feeling our sense of appreciating and honoring someone else can really include everyone.
But at the same time, there's a really there is a clarity about what we appreciate. Like
there, it's not that there's no boundaries, meaning, oh, everyone's I'll treat everyone
like my little brother or something because I really love him. And so just kind of have
that same relationship with everyone is really specifically appreciating specific things
about different people that everyone has this Buddha nature, but it's manifesting in such
unique, really special ways differently for different people. So where there's on the
one side, more of the emptiness side, there's this inclusivity to really see this this openness
to include more and to honor more and less tight fixed way. But at the same time, it's
really appreciating the detailed expressions that we all bring. So there's not this general
sometimes it's like, well, I have to love everyone equally. Well, that means I can't
love my mom as much. Or I have to love everyone like I love my mom. Like how does it work
practically, but it doesn't have to be the same role that we put everyone into. It's
more like that inclusivity, but then a very unique, specific way of appreciating and loving.
That's really important to see both that clarity side and the openness. And it seems to I mean,
it's just always interesting, you know, with the, the four boundless, like before, you know,
the four aspirational aspects of bodhicitta, right, is often how they're in the lineage
they're referred to, but that it's just, I think it's interesting the way like there's
the traditional order of like here, and how even Rinpoche is referred here, how compassion
is based on loving kindness in life. And then, of course, and there's rejoice, the rejoicing
aspects, and then equanimity. And it's interesting. I mean, here, when we're talking about loving
kindness, let that something as an ordinary being, like myself, I mean, that's something
we can easily refer to something somewhere, I think everybody can refer to that loving
kindness. And then there's this deeper aspect, like you know, Patra Rinpoche, it's just part
of the Buddha's teachings, how it's the equanimity, the boundless equanimity that makes all the
you know, the rest boundless and open or like Rinpoche is here not, not an affliction, because
it's not limited. So it's interesting how the Buddha, it's like equanimity, equanimity
comes last, and yet it's the thing that makes all the four boundless, boundless and immeasurable
and endless and really close, close, closer to, you know, keeping that view and then helping
us actualize it. And then yet, and then at the same time, the Buddha starts with like
this practice of just connecting with loving kindness, because it seems like it is, it's
something everyone can relate to, to some degree, and then grow from there. Just interesting,
just like generosity is like the first paramita. And of course, it's like the prajnaparamita,
the wisdom paramita that makes all the paramitas like really transcendent. But yeah, it's kind
of just this thought of generosity is the first paramita in a way. This is the way the Buddha
gave that. I mean, I'm not saying I know why the Buddha did anything, but, but just how
that, that object of actually giving and an open and generous heart and mind and is kind
of definitely a first step towards actualizing a bodhicitta too, which maybe that kind of,
I don't know, unless there's more to say about that, maybe we should move to the next kind
of area.
Yes, and then we can just kind of pull together ideas and people will have things to say about
the first one too. So in this, in the second section of this chapter, Ramachas are making
the point that everyone wants to be happy and no one wants to suffer. And that with love,
we can actually help other people find happiness and experience that happiness that everyone
wants. And then they go on to talk about the next Buddha, Buddha Maitreya of this fortunate
eon that his name means loving kindness. It's Maitreya, Maitreya. And then he became a Buddha
by practicing only one technique. And that was this same technique of loving kindness.
And so with love, we'll also develop the capacity to be patient with others with the difficulties
in changing circumstances. And that if we don't have patience now, that really what we
need to cultivate is love. And then they say, Ramachas say that when we generate bodhicitta
we'll become happy. And that we'll be actualizing our own bodhicitta then. And then also working
to benefit other beings at that same time. And so that attaining enlightenment for the
benefit of others, they also make this point which is really strong. Attaining enlightenment
for the benefit of others is the best thing that we can do in this life. And we should
try to expand this loving attitude without expecting anything in return. And that we
can mentally even give our own happiness to others and take on their suffering on to ourselves.
And this is called exchanging self and others and related to this practice of Tomlun. So
that's this second section of this chapter. And would someone like to read this second
point? May I answer you either? Sure. When you generate bodhicitta you'll be happy about
what you're doing. There are two reasons for this happiness. First, you're actualizing
bodhicitta within yourself. And second, you're engaged in working for all beings. Among the
many different thoughts you have every day, the thought of enlightenment is the most important.
As you develop this thought and increase it to include all the sentient beings who are
in need, it will bring great joy because what you're doing is so special. Attaining
enlightenment for the benefit of others is the best activity you can do in this life.
All sentient beings will join you in rejoicing because you are dedicating your activities
for their benefit. That's page 38, the second, full paragraph.
I always, when I first read this, I thought that when I say of all the thoughts you have
in your day, the constant thoughts of all the bodhicitta is the most important. When I
say it, no buts about it. It's the most important but. I just thought that was it. Wow. I thought
something similar today that sometimes we have such this wealth of dharma teachings
and instructions and practices and books we've read. And I thought of the ancient times in
Tibet where people would have to travel so far to see their teacher and receive one teaching
once and then they travel back and maybe not even see that teacher again their whole life.
But it's almost like receiving an instruction that's so clear like that. Bodhicitta is the
most important thought. That sometimes even if we just really keep something simple and
really kind of go into just one thing, one idea, one technique, it really like that seems
like and I agree it seems like one of those striking his instruction techniques that we
could really if we resonate with that and really hold that in our heart it seems like
really we can go really far. It's just such a sweet wonderful thing reading about bodhicitta
and let me kind of like you think about it's just not so surprising in a way like it's
so common because it's so common that we all want to be happy that all beings like wish
for happiness and love like it's just obviously obviously because it's not obvious to most
people but I mean just when you just reflect on that for a little bit of course like everyone
loves that you know and when you feel love for someone else and it's reciprocated or
like a group you know it's just like so warm and magnetizing and everyone everyone's happy
so I mean it's just it's really beautiful teaching. Yeah I thought it was important
to just this is kind of related to the first one but also on this dynamic between impartial
meaning like on the absolute level and the relative meaning the specific you know interaction
with people as individuals that we can actually interact with not in an abstract way but on
the one hand it's like on the one hand bodhicitta has to do totally with ourselves like I think
it's really important even though shanti jiva said all happiness without exception comes
from others all suffering with us do what comes from thinking of others and all unhappiness
comes from or suffering comes from thinking of ourselves but I think it's so important
to realize that like the other people aren't like say you have a relationship with somebody
and there's love there it's not that the other person is giving you that love if you think
that love is just the other person's like the love you have for them just comes from
the other person then of course when that falls apart it's a total disaster no more
love love is gone you know now it's a nightmare you know that's the exact opposite of bodhicitta
like the love is when you recognize in yourself to a certain extent that like those beautiful
qualities that that other people bring out in you because you stop searching you know
it's like in a certain sense you stop looking for something and twisting things and trying
to get what you want so much you recognize those qualities and then you just relax from
it and you enjoy and that's so I don't know so in that one hand bodhicitta which is related
with another point that Rinpoche is saying if you find yourself getting really impatient
with people and this and that it's not that they're making you that way it's that you
yourself can need to cultivate more of that bodhicitta from your own side so in that perspective
it doesn't have anything to do with other people giving you something that you don't
have it has to do with connecting with those qualities that are innate in you but otherwise
you always think you're getting somebody else is going to do it for you the next relationship
or the next you know they made me so angry you know and the impartiality comes in with
like that view of emptiness and recognizing that that's your nature you know that's their
nature that's your nature but and then I just got one more point which is really important
this doesn't mean that we can't have favorites in a certain sense or tell me what do you
think about this if you like you can have love and compassion for all beings but still
have a special place in your heart for your mother or for your teacher or for your you
know another friend just because you have love and compassion and bodhicitta for all beings
doesn't mean on the relative level you have special relationships with people that takes
these different forms you know that it's I don't know I think there's like this idea
that like everything becomes equal and like a bland in a bland uncaring robotic you know
like generic it's a very generic way it's like the learns the special qualities that
we're talking about earlier like just as though this blanket love that like everything gets
kind of like covered in it rather than like kind of highlighting these like specific qualities
that are kind of dynamically shooting through that blanket of love you know that both can
like kind of coexist and it's good to I mean they naturally do I think like what you're
talking about and that's clear in the teaching they say of those three types of meditation
experience like bliss clarity non-thought that this bliss holding on to a feeling of
satisfaction of pleasure of happiness of love the whole like that's a really big obstacle
whole it's I mean that's what you're talking about this blanket being attached to the
pleasurable feeling of feeling good you know that that is like one way that the teaching
really clearly say that this is not that's not boundless love it's an experience that
we're having and trying to recreate we're trying to hold and it's not like a natural
expression there's definitely a really strong holding there just as if it was an outer object
giving us the love and we're holding that too that's what you said so it's that what do you
how do you make it or how do you allow it to be boundless because you gotta start somewhere
I think it really has to do with the clinging it's really just like that whole notion of
like you know so there's this experience of love and putting a box around it or putting
your hand on it or however you want to say it but it's like drawing a line around it
or saying like this this is what it is and I'm calling it this and like it just goes from there
and name it and like what is love is the classic question love is chocolate ice cream chocolate
but it seems certain I mean it's kind of what I think we're all talking about Amanda was
touching on is just it's so simple it's just like music that tames a wild beast or this
like drop of like nectar that's just so soothing the thought of loving kindness or like Rinpoche
said you know I forget the exact words Kemper Rinpoche said but when we act like with the
spirit of loving kindness then we're completely one with the activity of all like beings and
then the way here with this practice the way you know keeping Bodhicitta the way even like
this whole book you know on opening to our primordial nature and how Bodhicitta ultimately
is our primordial nature is nothing but Bodhicitta completely you know unfettered and completely
awake I mean all those Buddha qualities enlightened qualities and that aspect of so how yeah of
keeping that thought of enlightenment and keeping the thought of all beings and like
whatever these drops of nectar that soothe us and like trying to call them back into
our mind as much and do these beautiful practices because obviously if we're working in the
thought of enlightenment and Bodhicitta but then also this practice of trying to actualize
and absorb the teachings into our mind and heart then it's kind of that path there's
all these levels and beautiful ways we can connect to like the practices and how Bodhicitta
just pulls it all together because ultimately in the teachings it is everything and again
not to make it murky and like lose sight of all the vivid qualities and dynamics of how
we can work whether online to actualize our Buddha nature and help you know help be a
benefit to all beings and be part of just that natural flow that awakens all beings
to their own Buddha nature and find those drops of peace just the way the practice becomes
deeper with the way you know we become more and more it's just become more and more rich
I guess because more and more we're uncovering the beautiful Buddha nature we all have or
the Bodhicitta so on page 39 they say that you have to practice these but while you practice
them you also try not to box them in but then it's like by practice do they mean do more
than just kind of replicate this experience which is pleasurable you know and then not
box it in or you know practicing it what do you mean by where it is? That's bottom of
page 39 which says a lot in compassion do not develop just by talking about them there
attitudes that have to be practiced so if you practice that attitude isn't that a little
bit of kind of it could be it can be boxing it in that's why they say like here Kebabacham
on his commentary on the words of my perfect teacher the order in which the four boundless
qualities are explained in the text puts love first like what you were saying however according
to the tradition of the fifth instructions if we do not start by meditating on boundless
impartiality the others will simply turn into the Brahma V Haras basically it will be love
but it will be limited it will be compassion but it will be limited so I think generally
they start by thinking of your mother or someone close to you and then cultivating that feeling
then thinking of all the other beings that you don't know all your friends and everyone
else and realizing that infinite times in the past they've been your mother you know they've
been your friends they've been so many times so expanding that like really specifically
one you know to everyone during this session and then they say at the end you have to like
here maybe just one more thing you said when you've meditated properly on impartiality
like during the sessions themselves your mind may start to change a little but if you do
not continue to reflect in the breaks between the sessions when you're going about your
daily life you will revert to your former habits former bad habits like iron that glows
red when heated in the fire and turns dull and black when it is pulled from the flames
and left on the ground so it's even more important to meditate in the breaks than during the
sessions themselves so anyway that's kind of related with the...
No it seems so I was thinking too like even like what you're talking about in it's almost
like as soon as we think we know we've stopped to grow it's not that we can't acknowledge
like what whatever kind of recognition and realization or understanding or insight we
might have but as soon as we start to like rest on our laurels or whatever everything
like it's that in a way whether it's when we stand up and we forget everything in our
practice in our day you know or whether we just stop to practice practicing altogether
because for whatever reason but just like really this whole aspect of practicing there's
always more to learn I mean you look at you know our precious great teachers there's studying
they are contemplating they are meditating you know all the very many edge masters are
like absorbing there's so much more you know just the more we can just acknowledge all
of these you know good things dedicate the merit but keep our joy devotion courage and
commitment like Rinpoche is always say and our bodhicitta and like just practice keep
keep our practice going and alive with this really essential juicy like qualities you
know without without you know grasping too much or relying too much on what we know not
boxing ourselves in in that sense but just keep going like even like you know Ghatte Ghatte
Para Ghatte Para Song Ghatte Bodhisoka you know just keep going keep going keep going
keep going until we really have attained complete enlightenment and inseparably you know radiating
you know that for all beings and always every step of the way as much as we can thinking
of others you know and just beginning that seems like it just loosens up our mind and
our rigid habitual patterns because obviously that's it too we have them we can't expect
to all of a sudden be fully enlightened it's good good to aspire to that we need to act
in our yeah first that that thought of enlightenment is the most important I think that's part
of what like you're talking about too is just like bodhicitta on the relative level keeps
us grounded keeps us like really clear in terms of our daily activities and thinking
of others really and then it's that thought of enlightenment which we could also say like
we're talking about last in the last study group devotion you know those the quality
of like really seeing all these incredible qualities of the enlightened beings and our
teachers and like really aspiring like that that keeps us open and keeps us from like
getting stuck and and like kind of more mundane you know activities so it's kind of like always
this too at least two tiered approach of like on the relative level really like thinking
of beings like love letting that love pervade our hearts and minds and everything we're
doing and like keeping it always open ever open through devotion through contemplating
the view however you want to say it but like that more like yeah maybe I'll go into this
third yeah yeah we have a think what yeah so 13 minutes yeah so I'll do the third section
real quick so um ribciché say that loving kindness and compassion have many benefits
ultimately that loving kindness and compassion bring enlightenment and then relatively there
are eight benefits that we'll discuss in this third topic and then lastly in this final
paragraph ribciché say it's important to know the value of having beneficial thoughts
and then to actually practice them and we have to practice this always begin our practice
with this motivation of loving kindness and bodhicitta and then conclude by dedicating
the merit for the enlightenment and benefit of all beings and that this activity would
then accumulate a measurable merit and then move us towards enlightenment very quickly
so I thought lo-drone can you read the third one please?
in bodhishaka when you taught the benefits of relative bodhicitta he said that ultimately
it results in enlightenment and relatively it brings eight special results first of these
is that your body and mind remain relaxed and joyful the second result of practicing
love and compassion is freedom from illness disease cannot attack you the third is protection
from external attacks through weapons the fourth is protection from poison if somebody
gives you poison or if you accidentally take poison it will not kill you the fifth result
is that you will be greatly appreciated by everyone not only human beings but non-human
beings as well the sixth is that you will be protected by the buddhas and bodhisattvas
the realized beings who have already developed bodhicitta the seventh benefit is that you
will be reborn in the higher realms the eighth is that all of your wishes will be spontaneously
fulfilled you will achieve whatever you desire or whatever you desire without difficulty
wow
sounds like we're getting natural
good incentive
but I had a question about this just a little confusion because it says you can't be harmed
by poison you won't get sick you you everyone will appreciate you or it says beings but
anyway but it seems like quite a few people who have developed those things to the highest
level have gotten sick and been poisoned and been attacked by weapons and so what I just
I don't know what that means or what that is
well I don't know the answer but a thought just comes to mind in response to that is
just that maybe it's you know maybe those things appear to be happening but it's more
like their their level of suffering isn't isn't there
yeah where where is our mind you know what I mean this whole thing like we're talking
about earlier being subject to condition so much looking for a thing you know we're relying
so much out out out out out but it seems like it really does come to different degrees and
then there's a degree of our realization too I mean who knows on the outer level how all
these things look and like of course we shouldn't be dismayed if we get sick or if you know
whatever happens that might you know but it's where we are in our mind like how we're perceiving
what's happening to us and relating to it we're like even that beautiful you know image
of the you know the dawn like right before Buddhist enlightenment when all the the the
legions and infinite like armies of Mara's we're all you know throwing all kinds of weapons
at the Buddha but just that loving kindness and that like I mean all these qualities were
right there like all the weapons turned to flowers and you know I mean image so I think
definitely the fact that we're working with our mind and our own ways of dealing with
what's arising and how we see what's arising is definitely part of it and then I think
like we can see just in the openness of reality the more we have a recognition of that and
like the emptiness nature these essence of all phenomena that's arising including subject
object all these levels then then naturally which is bori chi that's the whole part of
bori chita training too is then that we see all these what seems miraculous you know to
beings when we have more of an understanding of that then I mean I can see on that level
definitely how these things maybe even to an ordinary being seen from the outside you
know maybe it's all these things true you know yeah I mean there's definitely yeah even
the Buddha you know there's those stories too you know how like the Mandela thought
to through the big boulder and a little chip came and hit the Buddha but that was still
the ripening of some little bit of karma but it didn't didn't really hurt the Buddha too
much you know or just the way that too it's it's lessening I mean the karma is everything
bori chita just transforms everything it seems and it seems to like they said like a shanti
deva said literally if you overcome your own ego thing and you're filled with bori chita
you have no enemies literally because enemy depends on two sides you consider me your
enemy but I don't consider you my enemy right therefore you're not my enemy you know if
I have love and kindness towards you then no matter if you stab me or that's what the
teaching said even if they pull you apart from live but you'll have no enemies that
anyone could find in the whole universe because your side is you conquered your only enemy
which is your own selfish ego clinging antagonistic thoughts so from that perspective too it makes
more sense to me final statements final yeah I was just wondering is it brought up in the
special results that this bori chita does lessening ego clinging like you're talking about the
sense of not part me I want does it does that come out need a I mean definitely because
what they're talking about here this boundless love is the recognition of the emptiness nature
of love and therefore having it naturally come out and include all beings appreciating their
own Buddha nature to you so I mean they're always just to say that any time I'm talking
about love in this chapter is always a emptiness is always there to open this quality of love
to you so here I think this is saying that if we have boundless love these are the results
that come in some of these are that once we're fully expressive of that nature meaning we're
a Buddha and things blocking it then this is what comes for these are the qualities that
all these Buddhist experience and as we more and more come close to that and more and more
we experience these qualities like on our own side and we're not experiencing the difficulties
either just in our own minds I think all of these are talking about less ego clinging
I mean I think with each of these results they'd like it's almost like just maybe not said
specifically but that's what it means is that like there is less ego clinging involved in
every single one I mean that's why I like the Buddha calls them poison like I mean here
it's talking about poison twice over poison but just that sense of that's why the Buddha
calls the ignorance attachment you know version and then all the rest of the negative emotions
poisoned right because it it's just that it no matter what you put it in or mix it with
it's poison in that sense and so and that's ultimately that ego clinging is definitely
the thing that's really spoiling the whole natural beauty of things and the first step
I think of this love is we love ourselves and then if we can love our ego clinging in the
sense of not being so tight and hard on ourselves that is how we get the practice off the ground
it is how we relate to others and see how they're the same as me and we really definitely
start that in practice putting ourselves in the other person's shoes do I like it when
someone throws rocks at me and it interests me no so I should not throw rocks into the
other person just systematically putting ourselves in other people's shoes I think it's like
the foundation of everyone wants to be happy that's what the teachings always say nobody
wants suffering so as soon as we can really try to recognize that with every being that
we encounter I mean it seems like I mean that's what the teachings say I really the iceberg
starts crumbling so simple and so vast and beautiful I'm sure everyone will have their
own things to say in the study groups does anyone have anything else or should we dedicate
to keep them at home? It's happy holidays! Happy holidays!
Happy holidays! Happy holidays! Happy holidays! Happy holidays! Happy holidays! Happy holidays!
Happy holidays! Happy holidays! Happy holidays!
By this merit may all obtain omniscience may it defeat the enemy wrongdoing from the stormy
waves of birth old age sickness and death from the ocean of samsara may I free all beings
the precious bodhisattva and those without it may it be generated and those who have
it may it never diminish but always continue increasing.